fren, if i use spi for all adc/dac, is the following of use:
`SPI
(For example to write to a DAC482x, used on most AVR projects).

With a dedicated SPI peripheral (ATMega328p)
You just configure the SPI device, write a byte to the data register and it'll be shifted out in the background.

To write a word, you have two strategies: 1. write a byte, wait for the transmission bit to be cleared, write the second byte (as done on the Anushri). 2. Write a byte, do some other stuff that takes more clock cycles than shifting the first byte (blinking some status LEDs or doing some arithmetic to figure out the next byte to write), write the second byte. This is how things are done on the Shruthi-1 DSP board.

Note that on the Atmega328p, the USART can also be configured for SPI transmission. The advantage is that it has a two-byte buffer! So to write two bytes, you write the first byte in the data register, it's immediately copied to the transmission buffer and transmission starts, then you can write immediately a second byte in the data register that will be sent later. This is how I do things on the Ambika voicecards.

Without a dedicated SPI peripheral
From the CVPal code:

  enum UsiFlags {
    TICK = _BV(USIWM0) | _BV(USITC),
    TOCK = _BV(USIWM0) | _BV(USITC) | _BV(USICLK)
  };

  static inline void SpiSend(uint16_t word) {
    USIDR = word >> 8;

    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;

    USIDR = word & 0xff;

    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
    USICR = TICK;
    USICR = TOCK;
  }
Datasheet

Starting from page 105, especially pages 112 to 114.

The USI is a low-level hardware block that can be used for serial data transfer (SPI or I2C). Contrary to the SPI or I2C devices found on more expensive MCUs that are "set and forget" (you write your data in a register and then the MCU shifts it in the background), you still have to do a lot of stuff manually in software. The USI can only do basic things like shifting bits in the data register, toggling clock pins, and setting I/O ports according to a bit of the data register or the state of the clock.

The USIDR register contains the byte to be output.

Then you manually control the USICR register to toggle the clock pin (TICK), then toggle the clock pin back and shift a data bit (TOCK).

So what the code really does is:

    Write a byte in the data register
    Toggle the clock
    Toggle back the clock, output a bit of the data register, shift the data register
    ...
    8 times
    Write a second byte in the data register
    Toggle the clock
    Toggle back the clock, output a bit of the data register, shift the data register
    ...
    8 times
A lot of tedious work, but still less work than a software implementation of SPI!`

Thought for 23 seconds

Hello!

The code you've provided demonstrates how SPI communication is handled on AVR microcontrollers, specifically the ATmega328P, both with and without a dedicated SPI peripheral. While the code itself is tailored to AVR architecture, the underlying concepts can be valuable for understanding SPI communication in general.

Since you're planning to use a lower-end ARM microcontroller (from a cellphone IC), the specific register manipulations and hardware features will differ. However, the strategies for efficient SPI communication are still relevant. Let's explore how this applies to your project.

Understanding the Provided Code
With a Dedicated SPI Peripheral (ATmega328P)
Strategy 1: Write a byte to the SPI data register, wait for the transmission to complete, then write the next byte.
Strategy 2: Write a byte, perform other tasks while the byte is being transmitted, then write the next byte.
Without a Dedicated SPI Peripheral
Using the USI (Universal Serial Interface):
Manually control clock and data lines by toggling bits in the USI Control Register (USICR).
Shift out data bits by manipulating the USI Data Register (USIDR).
Applying These Concepts to an ARM Microcontroller
1. SPI Peripheral Availability
Most ARM microcontrollers, even lower-end ones, come with one or more dedicated SPI peripherals. These peripherals are designed to handle SPI communication efficiently, often with features like:

FIFO Buffers: For queuing multiple bytes.
DMA Support: For transferring data without CPU intervention.
Configurable Data Sizes: 8-bit, 16-bit, etc.
High-Speed Operation: Suitable for demanding applications like audio.
2. Efficient SPI Communication Strategies
Non-Blocking Communication: Utilize interrupt-driven SPI transfers or DMA to avoid CPU idle time.
Double Buffering: While one byte is being transmitted, prepare the next byte.
Batch Transfers: Send multiple bytes in a burst to reduce overhead.
Implementing SPI Communication on ARM
A. With a Dedicated SPI Peripheral
Configuration Steps
Initialize the SPI Peripheral:

Set the SPI mode (clock polarity and phase).
Configure data size (e.g., 16 bits for audio data).
Set the SPI clock speed.
Set Up GPIO Pins:

Configure the SPI pins (MOSI, MISO, SCK, CS) with the appropriate alternate functions.
Enable Interrupts or DMA (Optional):

For efficient data transfer, especially at high speeds.
Data Transmission Example
cpp
Copy code
// Pseudo-code for sending a 16-bit word via SPI
void spi_send_word(uint16_t data) {
    while (!SPI_IsTransmitBufferEmpty()) {
        // Wait for transmit buffer to be empty
    }
    SPI_WriteData(data);
}
Explanation:
Check if the transmit buffer is empty.
Write data to the SPI data register.
The SPI peripheral handles the shifting out of data.
Advantages
Hardware Managed: Less CPU intervention required.
Faster Speeds: Hardware SPI can achieve higher data rates.
Built-In Features: Support for different data sizes, clock configurations, etc.
B. Without a Dedicated SPI Peripheral
While most ARM microcontrollers have SPI peripherals, in cases where they are not available or all are in use, you can implement bit-banged SPI using GPIO pins.

Implementation Steps
Configure GPIO Pins:

Set up pins as outputs for MOSI and SCK.
If reading data, configure MISO as input.
Manual Clock and Data Control:

Manually set the MOSI pin high or low based on the data bit.
Toggle the SCK pin to clock the data into the slave device.
Bit-Banged SPI Example
cpp
Copy code
void bit_bang_spi_send(uint16_t word) {
    for (int i = 15; i >= 0; i--) {
        // Set MOSI based on the current bit
        if (word & (1 << i)) {
            GPIO_SetPinHigh(MOSI_PIN);
        } else {
            GPIO_SetPinLow(MOSI_PIN);
        }
        // Toggle clock
        GPIO_SetPinHigh(SCK_PIN);
        // Small delay if necessary
        GPIO_SetPinLow(SCK_PIN);
    }
}
Considerations
CPU Intensive: Requires the CPU to manage every bit transition.
Lower Speeds: Limited by the execution speed of the code.
Timing Sensitivity: Requires precise timing, which can be affected by interrupts or other processes.
Recommendations for Your Project
1. Utilize the Dedicated SPI Peripheral
Given that your ARM microcontroller likely has a dedicated SPI peripheral, it's highly recommended to use it for the following reasons:

Efficiency: Offloads data shifting to hardware.
Speed: Capable of handling high data rates required for audio processing.
Ease of Use: Simplifies code and reduces CPU load.
Steps to Implement
Identify SPI Capabilities: Consult the microcontroller's datasheet to understand its SPI features.
Configure SPI Settings: Match the settings required by your ADC/DAC devices (clock polarity, phase, data size).
Develop SPI Driver: Write or use existing SPI driver code tailored to your microcontroller.
Handle Multiple Devices: Use separate chip select (CS) lines for each SPI device or implement SPI bus sharing if necessary.
2. Efficient Data Transfer Techniques
Use DMA:
For continuous data streams (e.g., audio), DMA can transfer data between memory and the SPI peripheral without CPU intervention.
Interrupt-Driven Communication:
Set up interrupts to handle SPI events, allowing the CPU to perform other tasks.
3. Consider Buffering
Transmit and Receive Buffers:
Use ring buffers to queue data for transmission and reception.
Double Buffering:
While one buffer is being processed, prepare the next buffer.
Applying the Concepts from the Provided Code
While the specific register manipulations in your code are for the AVR's USI and won't directly translate to an ARM microcontroller, the following concepts are applicable:

A. Managing Limited Hardware Resources
USART in SPI Mode:
Some ARM microcontrollers allow the USART peripheral to operate in SPI mode, providing additional SPI interfaces.
Action: Check if your microcontroller supports this feature.
B. Software SPI (Bit-Banging)
Fallback Option:
If you run out of hardware SPI interfaces, you can implement SPI via bit-banging.
Use Cases:
Slow peripherals (e.g., control interfaces that don't require high-speed communication).
Prototyping or when hardware resources are constrained.
C. Understanding SPI Timing
Clocking Data:
The sequence of setting data bits and toggling the clock is universal.
Action: Ensure you understand the SPI mode required (clock polarity and phase) for your devices.
Additional Considerations
1. Handling Multiple SPI Devices
Separate SPI Buses:
If your microcontroller has multiple SPI peripherals, assign critical devices (like audio ADC/DAC) their own SPI bus.
Shared SPI Bus with Chip Select:
Use GPIO pins as CS lines to select the active device.
Ensure that timing and bus contention are managed properly.
2. Voltage Level Compatibility
Logic Level Conversion:
Ensure that the voltage levels of the SPI signals are compatible between the microcontroller and the ADC/DAC devices.
Action: Use level shifters if necessary.
3. Real-Time Constraints
Audio Processing Requirements:
High sampling rates (e.g., 44.1 kHz) require efficient data handling.
Action: Optimize SPI communication to prevent bottlenecks.
4. Driver Libraries and Middleware
Leverage Existing Code:
Utilize SPI driver libraries provided by the microcontroller vendor or open-source communities.
Benefits:
Saves development time.
Proven reliability and performance.
Practical Steps Forward
Consult the Microcontroller Datasheet:

Identify the available SPI peripherals and their features.
Note any alternate functions (e.g., USART in SPI mode).
Select Appropriate ADC/DAC Devices:

Ensure they are compatible with the SPI capabilities of your microcontroller.
Consider devices that support higher SPI speeds if necessary.
Develop or Acquire SPI Drivers:

Write drivers specific to your microcontroller, or adapt existing ones.
Implement efficient data transfer methods (DMA, interrupts).
Test Communication with Devices:

Set up a test environment to validate SPI communication.
Use logic analyzers or oscilloscopes to debug signal integrity and timing.
Optimize for Performance:

Profile your code to identify any inefficiencies.
Optimize SPI clock speeds and data handling routines.
Implement Error Handling:

Include checks for SPI transmission errors.
Implement retries or fault handling mechanisms.
Conclusion
The code you provided offers valuable insights into SPI communication strategies, particularly in environments with limited hardware resources. While the specific implementations differ between AVR and ARM microcontrollers, the principles remain relevant.

For your project:

Leverage the SPI peripherals available on your ARM microcontroller for efficient communication with your ADC/DAC devices.
Implement best practices in SPI communication, such as using DMA and interrupts to handle high data rates required for audio processing.
Consider hardware capabilities and constraints when designing your system, ensuring compatibility and optimal performance.
If you need assistance with specific implementations or further guidance on configuring SPI communication on your chosen ARM microcontroller, feel free to ask!

Additional Resources:

Microcontroller Vendor Documentation:
Provides detailed instructions and examples for SPI configuration.
Open-Source Libraries:
Projects like CMSIS or STM32Cube (for STM32 microcontrollers) offer SPI drivers and examples.
Community Forums and Projects:
Look into similar Eurorack module projects or ARM-based audio processing projects for inspiration and code samples.
Remember: Effective SPI communication is crucial for real-time audio processing applications. By utilizing the hardware features of your microcontroller and implementing efficient code, you'll ensure your module performs reliably and meets the demands of your design.





could you tell me what this is likely to be about and if it's of use, please fren:
Shruthi/Ambika button and LED I/O
Both use:

One (or several daisy-chained) 595 serial to parallel converter driving all the LEDs.
One (or several daisy-chained) 165 parallel to serial converter to read the switches.
These are connected to the MISO, MOSI, SCK line of the AVR's SPI peripheral, and an additional GPIO output, labelled IO_ENABLE.

When I want to read the 165s:

I strobe the IO_ENABLE line (quickly set it from high to low back to high). This causes the 165 to load its data.
I do one SPI read per byte of data to be read. The SPI hardware correctly shifts the data in on the MISO and SCKlines. Whatever happens with MOSI is ignored by the 595 because the IO_ENABLE (connected to its RCLK pin) remains high during the transfer.
When I want to write to the 595s:

I set IO_ENABLE low.
I do my writes. The SPI hardware shifts things out on the MOSI and SCK lines. Because IO_ENABLE is low, the 165 won't read and shift any data.
I set IO_ENABLE high.?
ChatGPT

Thought for 43 seconds

Certainly! The excerpt you've provided describes a method used in the Shruthi and Ambika synthesizers—designed by Mutable Instruments—for handling button and LED input/output (I/O) using shift registers connected via the SPI bus. This approach allows for efficient expansion of I/O capabilities while minimizing the number of microcontroller pins required.

Given that your project involves managing multiple buttons and LEDs for menu navigation and function selection, this method could be highly beneficial for your Eurorack module. Let's break down what's happening and discuss how it might apply to your design.

Understanding the Excerpt
Components Involved
74HC595 Serial-to-Parallel Shift Registers:

Purpose: Drive multiple LEDs.
Function: Convert serial data from the microcontroller into parallel outputs to control individual LEDs.
Connection: Data input connected to MOSI (Master Out Slave In) line of the SPI bus.
74HC165 Parallel-to-Serial Shift Registers:

Purpose: Read the state of multiple switches or buttons.
Function: Capture parallel input states and shift them out serially to the microcontroller.
Connection: Data output connected to MISO (Master In Slave Out) line of the SPI bus.
SPI Bus Lines:

MOSI: Used for sending data from the microcontroller to peripherals (e.g., LEDs via 595).
MISO: Used for receiving data from peripherals to the microcontroller (e.g., button states via 165).
SCK: Serial Clock line shared between the microcontroller and shift registers.
IO_ENABLE (GPIO Output):

Purpose: Control when the shift registers are active or capturing data.
Connection: Connected to the RCLK (Register Clock) pin of the 595 and the /PL (Parallel Load) pin of the 165.
Operational Steps
Reading from the 165 Shift Registers (Button Inputs)
Strobe IO_ENABLE Line:

Action: Quickly toggle IO_ENABLE from high to low back to high.
Effect: This negative edge triggers the 74HC165 to load the current state of its input pins (the switches) into its internal register.
SPI Read Operation:

Action: Perform SPI read(s) to shift out the data from the 165s.
Effect: The switch states are serially shifted out on the MISO line to the microcontroller.
Note: During this time, the 595s (LED drivers) ignore the SPI activity because their latch pin (RCLK connected to IO_ENABLE) remains high.
Writing to the 595 Shift Registers (LED Outputs)
Set IO_ENABLE Low:

Action: Pull IO_ENABLE to a low state.
Effect: The 74HC595s are prepared to receive data, while the 165s are disabled from interfering with the SPI bus.
SPI Write Operation:

Action: Send SPI data corresponding to the desired LED states.
Effect: The data is serially shifted into the 595s via the MOSI line.
Set IO_ENABLE High:

Action: Pull IO_ENABLE back to a high state.
Effect: This rising edge triggers the 595s to latch the shifted data to their outputs, updating the LEDs.
Note: The 165s are now ready for the next read cycle.
Relevance to Your Project
Benefits
Efficient I/O Expansion:

Allows control of many LEDs and reading multiple buttons using only a few microcontroller pins.
Ideal for your module, which requires handling multiple control elements.
Simplified Hardware Design:

Reduces the complexity of wiring and PCB layout by daisy-chaining shift registers.
Minimizes the number of required GPIO pins.
SPI Bus Utilization:

Leverages the SPI bus for both input and output operations.
Efficient use of existing communication lines.
Applicability
Button Inputs:

Read the state of numerous buttons (e.g., menu navigation, parameter selection) efficiently.
The 74HC165s can capture the state of multiple switches and shift them into the microcontroller.
LED Outputs:

Control a column of LEDs representing different functions or actions.
The 74HC595s can drive the LEDs based on data sent from the microcontroller.
Integration with Other SPI Devices:

Since your design already involves SPI communication with ADC/DAC components, you can manage all SPI devices through the same interface with careful timing and control.
Implementation Considerations
1. Hardware Connections
SPI Lines:

MOSI: Connects to the data input of the 595s.
MISO: Connects to the data output of the 165s.
SCK: Shared clock line for both shift registers.
IO_ENABLE (GPIO Pin):

Controls the loading and latching of data in both types of shift registers.
Connected to:
RCLK (Register Clock) pin of the 595s.
/PL (Parallel Load) pin of the 165s.
Daisy-Chaining Shift Registers:

You can chain multiple 595s or 165s to increase the number of LEDs or buttons without adding extra SPI lines.
Connect the serial output of one shift register to the serial input of the next.
2. Firmware Logic
Reading Buttons:

Strobe IO_ENABLE to load button states into the 165s.
Perform SPI reads to shift in the data.
Process the received data to determine button presses.
Updating LEDs:

Set IO_ENABLE low to prepare the 595s for data reception.
Perform SPI writes to send new LED states.
Set IO_ENABLE high to latch the data and update the LEDs.
3. Managing SPI Bus Conflicts
Shared SPI Bus:

Ensure that SPI communication with the shift registers doesn't interfere with other SPI devices (ADC/DAC).
Use separate Chip Select (CS) lines for different devices if possible.
Implement proper SPI transaction management in your code.
Clock Speed Considerations:

Shift registers like the 74HC595 and 74HC165 have maximum clock frequencies (typically up to 20 MHz for 74HC series).
Ensure that the SPI clock speed is compatible with all connected devices.
4. Voltage Level Compatibility
Logic Levels:
Verify that the voltage levels of the shift registers match your microcontroller's logic levels (e.g., 3.3V or 5V).
If there's a mismatch, use level-shifting circuits or choose shift registers that operate at your microcontroller's voltage.
5. Timing Requirements
IO_ENABLE Timing:
Correct timing of the IO_ENABLE line is crucial to ensure that data is correctly loaded and latched.
Refer to the datasheets of the 74HC595 and 74HC165 for timing diagrams and requirements.
Advantages of This Approach
Scalability:

Easily expand the number of inputs and outputs by adding more shift registers.
Minimal changes to the microcontroller firmware and hardware connections.
Cost-Effective:

Shift registers are inexpensive components.
Reduces the need for more complex and costly GPIO expansion solutions.
Simplicity:

Simplifies the PCB layout by reducing the number of direct connections to the microcontroller.
Streamlines the code for handling I/O operations.
Potential Challenges and Solutions
Challenge 1: SPI Bus Contention
Issue: Multiple devices sharing the SPI bus may cause data collisions or interference.
Solution:
Use separate CS lines for each SPI device.
Ensure that only one device is active on the bus at any time.
Implement mutexes or critical sections in firmware if using an RTOS.
Challenge 2: Speed Limitations
Issue: Shift registers may not handle the high SPI clock speeds used for ADC/DAC communication.
Solution:
If your microcontroller supports it, use multiple SPI peripherals with different clock speeds.
Alternatively, adjust the SPI clock speed when communicating with the shift registers.
Challenge 3: Firmware Complexity
Issue: Managing the IO_ENABLE line and SPI transactions may add complexity to your code.
Solution:
Modularize your code by creating dedicated functions for reading inputs and updating outputs.
Use state machines or event-driven programming to manage I/O operations efficiently.
Alternative Approaches
If you decide that sharing the SPI bus is not feasible or introduces too much complexity, consider the following alternatives:

1. Use Separate SPI Buses
Description: Utilize additional SPI peripherals if available on your microcontroller.
Pros: Isolates communication with different devices, preventing conflicts.
Cons: May not be possible on microcontrollers with limited SPI interfaces.
2. I²C GPIO Expanders
Description: Use I²C-based I/O expanders like the MCP23017 for additional GPIO pins.
Pros: Frees up the SPI bus for high-speed communication with ADC/DACs.
Cons: I²C is generally slower than SPI; may not be suitable for time-critical inputs like fast button presses.
3. Direct GPIO Connections
Description: Connect buttons and LEDs directly to the microcontroller's GPIO pins.
Pros: Simplifies the firmware logic.
Cons: Not practical if you have a large number of I/O devices and limited GPIO pins.
Conclusion
The method used in the Shruthi and Ambika synthesizers for button and LED I/O via shift registers and the SPI bus is both clever and efficient. It's particularly well-suited for applications like your Eurorack module, where you need to manage multiple buttons and LEDs without dedicating a large number of microcontroller pins.

Advantages for Your Project:

Efficiently expands I/O capabilities.
Minimizes hardware complexity.
Leverages existing SPI communication infrastructure.
Considerations:

Ensure proper management of the SPI bus to prevent conflicts with other devices.
Verify voltage level compatibility between components.
Carefully implement firmware logic for timing-sensitive operations.
Next Steps
Review Component Datasheets:

Read the datasheets for the 74HC595 and 74HC165 to understand their operation and limitations.
Plan Hardware Integration:

Design your circuit to include the shift registers with appropriate connections.
Consider using sockets or headers for flexibility during prototyping.
Develop Firmware Modules:

Write and test code for reading button states and updating LEDs using the SPI bus and IO_ENABLE control.
Prototype and Test:

Build a prototype of your circuit and test the I/O operations.
Use debugging tools like logic analyzers to verify SPI communication.
Optimize and Iterate:

Refine your hardware and firmware based on testing results.
Optimize SPI configurations and I/O handling for performance and reliability.
Feel free to ask if you need further assistance with implementing this method or adapting it to your specific microcontroller and project needs! The approach is highly adaptable and can significantly enhance the functionality of your module while keeping the design efficient.

Additional Resources:

Shift Register Tutorials:
Look up tutorials on using 74HC595 and 74HC165 shift registers for practical examples.
SPI Bus Management:
Research best practices for managing multiple devices on the SPI bus.
Community Projects:
Explore open-source projects like the Shruthi or Ambika firmware for inspiration and code examples.
By leveraging this method, you can effectively manage your module's buttons and LEDs, providing a rich user interface without overcomplicating your hardware design.





